
000
FXUS61 KPHI 201947
AFDPHI

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Mount Holly NJ
347 PM EDT Thu Jun 20 2019

.SYNOPSIS...
An area of low pressure will move to our north tonight, pulling a
cold front across the area tonight, with a second front or surface
trough moving across the area Friday morning. Steady northwest flow
will develop Friday into Saturday, before high pressure briefly
affects the area Saturday night, before shifting offshore and to our
south Sunday. A warm front will lift across the area Sunday night
into Monday as an area of low pressure moves across the Great Lakes
region into southeast Canada. High pressure builds to our south
through the middle of next week, while a surface trough develops
across the east coast.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM FRIDAY MORNING/...
Several round of showers and thunderstorms can be expected this
afternoon, this evening, and overnight across the area. Each is tied
to a short wave/vorticity impulse that will move across the area at
different times. The first is moving across the area this afternoon.
The second will come by sunset this evening, while the third will
come overnight around or after midnight.

An area of low pressure will move to our north tonight, which will
bring a cold front across the area. Until this front moves across
the area, the airmass will remain very moist with PW values 1.75-
2.00 inches. Meanwhile, CAPE values have reached 1,500-2,000+ J/kg
for much of the area this afternoon now that the warm front has
lifted north of the area. With mid level flow increasing to 30-40
knots, bulk shear has increased to 35-45 knots. This should be
sufficient to allow for some storms to become severe, potentially
producing damaging winds and hail.

As mentioned, the airmass remains very moist, so any showers and
thunderstorms could produce very heavy rainfall in a short amount of
time. An additional 1-3 inches is possible for some locations, which
would produce additional flash flooding, especially those areas that
received a lot of rainfall last night. Therefore the Flash Flood
Watch remains in effect into the overnight hours.

There is also a chance for patchy fog to develop later tonight,
especially for northeast Pennsylvania and northern New Jersey where
any winds become lighter and rain falls this afternoon and evening.
We do not expect dense fog as there will likely be some wind and
enough mixing with any additional short wave/vorticity impulses and
showers moving through.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM FRIDAY MORNING THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
The low pressure will continue moving to our northeast offshore of
New England through Friday. It will drag a surface trough across the
area during the morning while a short wave/vorticity impulse moves
across the area. As this impulse moves across during the morning,
another round of showers will impact the area through the morning
hours. There is very little, if any instability, so we do not expect
thunderstorms. However, PW values remain 1.50-1.75 inches until the
through moves through, so some showers could have a brief period of
moderate to heavy rainfall. Once the showers move through the area,
skies will begin to clear out and winds will become gusty as there
will be a tight gradient with low pressure to our northeast and high
pressure to our northwest. This will likely lead to be quite gusty
during the day Friday, possibly reaching 20-30 mph.

High pressure remains to our west for Friday night into Saturday,
briefly building over the area Saturday night. This will keep dry
conditions across the area through Friday night and Saturday. Winds
will likely gust again Saturday, but not as gusty as Friday,
generally 15-20 mph.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH THURSDAY/...
Overview...

We will finally see some changes in the long term, as the mid-
Atlantic will for a few days find itself downstream of a ridge over
the Great Lakes and upstream a departing trough associated with a
departing surface low. This will mean a well-deserved multi-day
break in rainfall across our area, as high pressure builds in to the
northwest and guides any ridge-riding convective disturbances to our
south. And such disturbances will exist, as the ridging to our west
is not very long in wavelength, and ample troughing continues to
exist further west, which will keep the pattern active over the
Plains and Midwest. That then raises questions for our weather going
further into next week. It appears likely the ridge to our west will
start to flatten out, with renewed troughing pushing into the Great
Lakes. Thus, it is likely we will be dealing with another frontal
system by early next week. Early indications are that we will not
deal with such a prolonged and impactful stretch of unsettled
weather. However, the one constant in the hemispheric pattern
remains a seemingly unbreakable block over Greenland, which should
briefly relax over the weekend but then looks to build right back in
next week. Because of this, even as longwave ridging attempts to
build over the CONUS, we continue to see frequent troughing over
southern Canada with the trough unable to lift out. This leaves us
vulnerable to additional frontal disturbances even in a pattern
which is trying to trend warmer and drier overall. We may get there
eventually, but for now after the break over the weekend it appears
next week will be on the unsettled side with a return of higher
humidity and occasional shower and storm chances.

Dailies...

Sunday... A pleasant and quiet weekend awaits us as high
pressure moves overhead. The trough from Friday will still not
have fully pulled away by Saturday, and flow will remain
northerly or northwesterly, so this will keep temperatures a
little below normal even with sunshine. By Sunday, winds turn
out of the west as the trough pushes further off to the east,
and we start to advect in warmer air. So Sunday looks several
degrees warmer than Saturday, with highs mostly in the mid 80s
and dew points creeping up a little but still comfortable.

Monday-Tuesday... A warm frontal passage is expected Sunday night or
early Monday as low pressure tracks into the Great Lakes. Time
constraints prevented any detailed analysis for this period, but the
chance for showers and thunderstorms looks to return. In addition,
behind the warm front, higher dew points and warmer temperatures are
expected, and some areas may see highs approach 90 by Monday.

Mid-week/beyond... Low confidence. Guidance is widely spread on
whether the early week system or an additional frontal system may
continue to impact the region, or if high pressure and hotter
weather will build in. No strong preference at this time.

&&

.AVIATION /20Z THURSDAY THROUGH TUESDAY/...
The following discussion is for KPHL, KPNE, KTTN, KABE, KRDG, KILG,
KMIV, KACY and surrounding areas.

This afternoon-tonight...There remains a chance of showers and
thunderstorms this afternoon which could temporarily lower ceilings
and visibility across the area. Outside of showers and
thunderstorms, VFR conditions will continue through this afternoon
into this evening. Winds will remain southwest for the rest of the
afternoon into this evening.

Another round of showers is expected later this evening and
overnight. Isolated thunderstorms are also possible. Conditions are
expected to lower to MVFR later this evening and possibly IFR
overnight for some areas. Winds will shift to the west through the
overnight and become light for some areas.

Friday...MVFR or IFR conditions will start the forecast for Friday
morning. A slow improvement is expected through the morning into the
afternoon to VFR. Winds will become gusty out of the northwest by
later morning into the afternoon. Wind could gust 20-25 knots.

Outlook...

Friday night-Saturday night...VFR conditions expected.
Northwest winds may gust 15-20 knots during the day Saturday.

Sunday... VFR. High confidence. Southwesterly winds 5 to 10 kt.

Sunday night-Monday... Periods of cig and vsby restrictions
possible along with scattered showers and tstms. Southwest winds
of 5 to 10 kt.

&&

.MARINE...
Timing of the Small Craft Advisory has been adjusted as winds
along the Delaware and New Jersey Atlantic coastal waters are
already gusting around 25 knots. The northern New Jersey
Atlantic coastal waters was started earlier as well as seas may
build sooner. Delaware Bay was left as it is.

All advisories will continue through the day Friday. An
occasional wind gust may reach close to 35 knots on Friday.

Outlook...

Friday night-Saturday night...Conditions expected to drop below
advisory levels by Friday night and remain below advisory
levels through Saturday night.

Sunday-Tuesday... Sub-SCA conditions expected for most of the
weekend into early next week.

Rip Currents...

There is a low risk for the development of dangerous rip currents at
the NJ and DE ocean beaches today. Winds become south with waves in
the surf zone about 3 feet.

&&

.PHI WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...Flash Flood Watch until 10 PM EDT this evening for PAZ054-055-
     060>062-070-071-101>106.
NJ...Flash Flood Watch until 10 PM EDT this evening for NJZ001-
     007>010-012>027.
DE...Flash Flood Watch until 10 PM EDT this evening for DEZ001.
MD...Flash Flood Watch until 10 PM EDT this evening for MDZ008-012.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 6 PM EDT Friday for ANZ451>455.
     Small Craft Advisory from 10 PM this evening to 6 PM EDT
     Friday for ANZ450.
     Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 6 PM EDT Friday
     for ANZ430-431.

&&

$$

Synopsis...Robertson
Near Term...Robertson
Short Term...Robertson
Long Term...O`Brien
Aviation...Robertson/O`Brien
Marine...Robertson/O`Brien


